# Building-an-AI-Powered-Knowledge-Base-for-Biomarkers-of-Abnormal-Placentation-Disorders
<b>Research conducted as part of the [Artificial Intelligence Biomedical Informatics Data Science (AIBIDS)](https://www.aibids.org/) program between the University of Pittsburgh and Gallaudet University.</b>

<b>Authors</b>: Jillian Puskar, Dr. Vanathi Gopalakrishnan 

### Repository Overview
<ol><li>About the project</li><ol><li>concept-paper-JillianPuskar.docx</li><li>methods.docx (coming soon)</li></ol><li>Data</li><ol><li>data/</li><ol><li>literature.xlsx</li><li>PDFs copies of source literature (missing one; will be added soon)</li></ol></ol><li>Results</li><ol><li>results/</li><ol><li>knowledge-base/</li><ol><li>All AI-generated documents part of the knowledge base, relevant as of 7/24/2026</li></ol><li>results-summary.docx (coming soon) </li></ol></ol><li>Validation</li><ol><li>validation/</li><ol><li>baselines/</li><ol><li>Original baselines</li><li>Consolidated baselines (versions used for validation)</li></ol><li>Validation reports (more coming soon) </li><li>validation.docx (validation methodology and rubric)</li></ol></ol>
<br>

## Concept 
<b>***The project concept paper, which this abbreviated summary is derived from, is included in the root directory as "concept-paper-JillianPuskar.docx." More thorough descriptions of our methods (such as our literature search technique) are found within "methods.docx."</b><br>

This study aims to build an AI-powered knowledge base to evaluate currently-monitored, multimodal biomarkers for detecting placenta accreta and placenta previa in various stages of pregnancy based on current literature. Human-guided AI interactions also seek to establish insights into the unique challenges of building AI knowledge bases for research tasks and implementing guardrails to improve their usefulness and accuracy. 

### Motivation
Abnormal placentation disorders, including placenta previa and placenta accreta, are serious pregnancy complications strongly associated with morbidity. Placenta accreta spectrum (PAS) disorders, including placenta accreta, percreta, and increta, are the result of “abnormal adherence of the placental trophoblast to the uterine myometrium” and cause severe intrapartum hemorrhage when the placenta does not spontaneously detach after delivery (1; 2). PAS is becoming an increasingly prevalent obstetric challenge, occurring in approximately 1 in every 272 pregnancies - a rise associated with an increase in cesarean section deliveries- and the current treatment usually involves a cesarean hysterectomy and/or preterm delivery (3; 1). Placenta previa, a complication on its own and also a known independent high-risk factor for PAS, occurs when the placenta “[implants] partially or completely within the lower uterine segment” (4), partially or completing blocking the cervix. Also on the rise due to increased cesarean section deliveries, it occurs in approximately 4 in every 1000 pregnancies and is associated with potentially life-threatening antepartum, intrapartum, and postpartum hemorrhage (5). Roughly 3% of women with placenta previa develop placenta accreta spectrum in the same pregnancy, and this risk greatly rises after one or more cesarean sections (12).  For example, the risk of developing PAS with PP becomes 11% after two prior cesarean sections and increases up to 67% after five or more cesarean sections (12). Presently, an incomplete set of biomarkers has been established to aid in the critical early detection of these obstetric disorders and inform proactive treatment. Using an LLM (Large Language Model), we intend to establish an evolving knowledge base to quantify and profile currently studied multimodal biomarkers for placenta accreta and previa. The self-learning capability of LLM models allows the repository at the heart of the knowledge base to be automatically improved monotonically, making the system adaptive and appropriate for further research applications. 

In addition, the continuing improvement and growing accessibility of generative AI (Artificial Intelligence) models make them well-suited to function as personalized research assistants to complement “intelligent” human tasks, such as literature analysis, for automated efficiency and association discovery. However, because of the probabilistic nature of such models, ethical concerns regarding output accuracy, including its tendency to “hallucinate” information, have arisen; for example, nearly $67.4 billion in global business losses resulting from AI hallucinations occurred in 2024 (6). To minimize these shortcomings, we want to create a framework for developing a governance strategy for an AI-powered research assistant to yield accurate profiles of multimodal biomarkers for placental disorders, using placenta accreta and placenta previa as the initial exploratory cases, derived from literature. Our developed governance strategy will constrain the model and serve as a measure of its success at completing tasks to ultimately obtain a valuable understanding of how AI tools can be better utilized in research and determine if building a Markdown-format knowledge base with a repository-based infrastructure is feasible given these currently available tools. 


### Bibliography 
1. Silver, R. M., & Branch, D. W. (April 18, 2018). Placenta Accreta Spectrum. The New England Journal of Medicine, 378(16), 1529-1536. doi:10.1056/NEJMcp1709324 
2. Afshar, Y., Dong, J., Zhao, P., Li, L., Zhang, R. Y., Zhang, C., Yin, O., Han, C. S., Einerson, B. D., Gonzalez, T. L., Zhang, H., Zhou, A., Yang, Z., Chou, S., Sun, N., Cheng, J., Zhu, H., Wang, J., Zhang, T. X.,…, Zhu, Y. (August 3, 2021). Circulating trophoblast cell clusters for early detection of placenta accreta spectruk disorders. Nature Communications, 12(4408). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24627-2 
3. Placenta Accreta Spectrum Disorder. (n.d.). UPMC. https://www.upmc.com/conditions/p/placenta-accreta 
4. Javed, H., Habiba, U., Rubab, U. E., Saleem, S., Khan, Z. A., Ghafoor, L. A., Karim, S., Noor, S. M., Shah, M., & Khan, W. S. (January 9, 2026). Risk Factors Associated With Placenta Previa: A Matched Case-Control Study. Cureus, 18(1). doi:10.7759/cureus.101157
5. Kuribayashi, M., Tsuda, H., Ito, Y., Tezuka, A., Ando, T., Tamakoshi, K., & Mizuno, K. (November 5, 2021). Evaluation of the risk factors for antepartum hemorrhage in cases of placenta previa: a retrospective cohort study. Journal of International Medical Research,49(11). doi:10.1177/03000605211054706 
6. AI Hallucination Rates & Benchmarks in 2026. (June 9, 2026). Suprmind. https://suprmind.ai/hub/ai-hallucination-rates-and-benchmarks/ 
